<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-UK">
	<head>
		<title>Scene I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<div>
				<h2 class="c017">SCENE I</h2>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c018">A fine spring morning on the river Meuse, between Lorraine and Champagne, in the year 1429 <span class="fss">A.D.</span>, in the castle of Vaucouleurs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Captain Robert de Baudricourt, a military squire, handsome and physically energetic, but with no will of his own, is disguising that defect in his usual fashion by storming terribly at his steward, a trodden worm, scanty of flesh, scanty of hair, who might be any age from 18 to 55, being the sort of man whom age cannot wither because he has never bloomed.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The two are in a sunny stone chamber on the first floor of the castle. At a plain strong oak table, seated in chair to match, the captain presents his left profile. The steward stands facing him at the other side of the table, if so deprecatory a stance as his can be called standing. The mullioned thirteenth-century window is open behind him. Near it in the corner is a turret with a narrow arched doorway leading to a winding stair which descends to the courtyard. There is a stout fourlegged stool under the table, and a wooden chest under the window.</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No eggs! No eggs!! Thousand thunders, man, what do you mean by no eggs?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sir: it is not my fault. It is the act of God.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Blasphemy. You tell me there are no eggs; and you blame your Maker for it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sir: what can I do? I cannot lay eggs.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">sarcastic</span>] Ha! You jest about it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No, sir, God knows. We all have to go without eggs just as you have, sir. The hens will not lay.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Indeed! [<span class="sd-in">Rising</span>] Now listen to me, you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">humbly</span>] Yes, sir.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What am I?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What are you, sir?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">coming at him</span>] Yes: what am I? Am I Robert, squire of Baudricourt and captain of this castle of Vaucouleurs: or am I a cowboy?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Oh, sir, you know you are a greater man here than the king himself.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Precisely. And now, do you know what you are?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am nobody, sir, except that I have the honor to be your steward.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">driving him to the wall, adjective by adjective</span>] You have not only the honor of being my steward, but the privilege of being the worst, most incompetent, drivelling snivelling jibbering jabbering idiot of a steward in France. [<span class="sd-in">He strides back to the table.</span>]</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">cowering on the chest</span>] Yes, sir: to a great man like you I must seem like that.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">turning</span>] My fault, I suppose. Eh?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">coming to him deprecatingly</span>] Oh, sir: you always give my most innocent words such a turn!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I will give your neck a turn if you dare tell me, when I ask you how many eggs there are, that you cannot lay any.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">protesting</span>] Oh sir, oh sir⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No: not oh sir, oh sir, but no sir, no sir. My three Barbary hens and the black are the best layers in Champagne. And you come and tell me that there are no eggs! Who stole them? Tell me that, before I kick you out through the castle gate for a liar and a seller of my goods to thieves. The milk was short yesterday, too: do not forget that.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">desperate</span>] I know, sir. I know only too well. There is no milk: there are no eggs: tomorrow there will be nothing.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Nothing! You will steal the lot: eh?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No, sir: nobody will steal anything. But there is a spell on us: we are bewitched.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That story is not good enough for me. Robert de Baudricourt burns witches and hangs thieves. Go. Bring me four dozen eggs and two gallons of milk here in this room before noon, or Heaven have mercy on your bones! I will teach you to make a fool of me. [<span class="sd-in">He resumes his seat with an air of finality</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sir: I tell you there are no eggs. There will be none⁠—not if you were to kill me for it⁠—as long as The Maid is at the door.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The Maid! What maid? What are you talking about?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The girl from Lorraine, sir. From Domremy.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising in fearful wrath</span>] Thirty thousand thunders! Fifty thousand devils! Do you mean to say that that girl, who had the impudence to ask to see me two days ago, and whom I told you to send back to her father with my orders that he was to give her a good hiding, is here still?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I have told her to go, sir. She <span class="nonstandard">wont</span>.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I did not tell you to tell her to go: I told you to throw her out. You have fifty men-at-arms and a dozen lumps of ablebodied servants to carry out my orders. Are they afraid of her?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">She is so positive, sir.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">seizing him by the scruff of the neck</span>] Positive! Now see here. I am going to throw you downstairs.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No, sir. Please.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, stop me by being positive. It’s quite easy: any slut of a girl can do it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">hanging limp in his hands</span>] Sir, sir: you cannot get rid of her by throwing me out. [<span class="sd-in">Robert has to let him drop. He squats on his knees on the floor, contemplating his master resignedly.</span>] You see, sir, you are much more positive than I am. But so is she.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am stronger than you are, you fool.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No, sir: it <span class="nonstandard">isnt</span> that: it’s your strong character, sir. She is weaker than we are: she is only a slip of a girl; but we cannot make her go.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You parcel of curs: you are afraid of her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising cautiously</span>] No, sir: we are afraid of you; but she puts courage into us. She really <span class="nonstandard">doesnt</span> seem to be afraid of anything. Perhaps you could frighten her, sir.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">grimly</span>] Perhaps. Where is she now?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Down in the courtyard, sir, talking to the soldiers as usual. She is always talking to the soldiers except when she is praying.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Praying! Ha! You believe she prays, you idiot. I know the sort of girl that is always talking to soldiers. She shall talk to me a bit. [<span class="sd-in">He goes to the window and shouts fiercely through it</span>] Hallo, you there!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">A GIRL’S VOICE</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">bright, strong and rough</span>] Is it me, sir?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes, you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE VOICE.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Be you captain?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes, damn your impudence, I be captain. Come up here. [<span class="sd-in">To the soldiers in the yard</span>] Shew her the way, you. And shove her along quick. [<span class="sd-in">He leaves the window and returns to his place at the table, where he sits magisterially.</span>]</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">whispering</span>] She wants to go and be a soldier herself. She wants you to give her soldier’s clothes. Armor, sir! And a sword! Actually! [<span class="sd-in">He steals behind Robert</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Joan appears in the turret doorway. She is an ablebodied country girl of 17 or 18, respectably dressed in red, with an uncommon face: eyes very wide apart and bulging as they often do in very imaginative people, a long well-shaped nose with wide nostrils, a short upper lip, resolute but full-lipped mouth, and handsome fighting chin. She comes eagerly to the table, delighted at having penetrated to Baudricourt’s presence at last, and full of hope as to the result. His scowl does not check or frighten her in the least. Her voice is normally a hearty coaxing voice, very confident, very appealing, very hard to resist.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">bobbing a curtsey</span>] Good morning, captain squire. Captain: you are to give me a horse and armor and some soldiers, and send me to the Dauphin. Those are your orders from my Lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">outraged</span>] Orders from your lord! And who the devil may your lord be? Go back to him, and tell him that I am neither duke nor peer at his orders: I am squire of Baudricourt; and I take no orders except from the king.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">reassuringly</span>] Yes, squire: that is all right. My Lord is the King of Heaven.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Why, the girl’s mad. [<span class="sd-in">To the steward</span>] Why <span class="nonstandard">didnt</span> you tell me so, you blockhead?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sir: do not anger her: give her what she wants.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">impatient, but friendly</span>] They all say I am mad until I talk to them, squire. But you see that it is the will of God that you are to do what He has put into my mind.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is the will of God that I shall send you back to your father with orders to put you under lock and key and thrash the madness out of you. What have you to say to that?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You think you will, squire; but you will find it all coming quite different. You said you would not see me; but here I am.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">appealing</span>] Yes, sir. You see, sir.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Hold your tongue, you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">abjectly</span>] Yes, sir.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">to Joan, with a sour loss of confidence</span>] So you are presuming on my seeing you, are you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">sweetly</span>] Yes, squire.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">feeling that he has lost ground, brings down his two fists squarely on the table, and inflates his chest imposingly to cure the unwelcome and only too familiar sensation</span>] Now listen to me. I am going to assert myself.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">busily</span>] Please do, squire. The horse will cost sixteen francs. It is a good deal of money; but I can save it on the armor. I can find a soldier’s armor that will fit me well enough: I am very hardy; and I do not need beautiful armor made to my measure like you wear. I shall not want many soldiers: the Dauphin will give me all I need to raise the siege of Orleans.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">flabbergasted</span>] To raise the siege of Orleans!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">simply</span>] Yes, squire: that is what God is sending me to do. Three men will be enough for you to send with me if they are good men and gentle to me. They have promised to come with me. Polly and Jack and⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Polly!! You impudent baggage, do you dare call squire Bertrand de Poulengey Polly to my face?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">His friends call him so, squire: I did not know he had any other name. Jack⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That is Monsieur John of Metz, I suppose?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes, squire. Jack will come willingly: he is a very kind gentleman, and gives me money to give to the poor. I think John Godsave will come, and Dick the Archer, and their servants John of Honecourt and Julian. There will be no trouble for you, squire: I have arranged it all: you have only to give the order.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">contemplating her in a stupor of amazement</span>] Well, I am damned!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">with muffled sweetness</span>] No, squire: God is very merciful; and the blessed saints Catherine and Margaret, who speak to me every day [<span class="sd-in">he gapes</span>], will intercede for you. You will go to paradise; and your name will be remembered for ever as my first helper.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">to the steward, still much bothered, but changing his tone as he pursues a new clue</span>] Is this true about Monsieur de Poulengey?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">eagerly</span>] Yes, sir, and about Monsieur de Metz too. They both want to go with her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">thoughtful</span>] Mf! [<span class="sd-in">He goes to the window, and shouts into the courtyard</span>] Hallo! You there: send Monsieur de Poulengey to me, will you? [<span class="sd-in">He turns to Joan</span>]. Get out; and wait in the yard.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">smiling brightly at him</span>] Right, squire. [<span class="sd-in">She goes out</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">to the steward</span>] Go with her, you, you dithering imbecile. Stay within call; and keep your eye on her. I shall have her up here again.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do so in God’s name, sir. Think of those hens, the best layers in Champagne; and⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Think of my boot; and take your backside out of reach of it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The steward retreats hastily and finds himself confronted in the doorway by Bertrand de Poulengey, a lymphatic French gentleman-at-arms, aged 36 or thereabout, employed in the department of the provost-marshal, dreamily absent-minded, seldom speaking unless spoken to, and then slow and obstinate in reply: altogether in contrast to the self-assertive, loud-mouthed, superficially energetic, fundamentally will-less Robert. The steward makes way for him, and vanishes.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Poulengey salutes, and stands awaiting orders.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">genially</span>]. It <span class="nonstandard">isnt</span> service, Polly. A friendly talk. Sit down. [<span class="sd-in">He hooks the stool from under the table with his instep</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Poulengey, relaxing, comes into the room; places the stool between the table and the window; and sits down ruminatively. Robert, half sitting on the end of the table, begins the friendly talk.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Now listen to me, Polly. I must talk to you like a father.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Poulengey looks up at him gravely for a moment, but says nothing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It’s about this girl you are interested in. Now, I have seen her. I have talked to her. First, she’s mad. That <span class="nonstandard">doesnt</span> matter. Second, she’s not a farm wench. She’s a bourgeoise. That matters a good deal. I know her class exactly. Her father came here last year to represent his village in a lawsuit: he is one of their notables. A farmer. Not a gentleman farmer: he makes money by it, and lives by it. Still, not a laborer. Not a mechanic. He might have a cousin a lawyer, or in the Church. These sort of people may be of no account socially; but they can give a lot of bother to the authorities. That is to say, to me. Now no doubt it seems to you a very simple thing to take this girl away, humbugging her into the belief that you are taking her to the Dauphin. But if you get her into trouble, you may get me into no end of a mess, as I am her father’s lord, and responsible for her protection. So friends or no friends, Polly, hands off her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">with deliberate impressiveness</span>] I should as soon think of the Blessed Virgin herself in that way, as of this girl.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">coming off the table</span>] But she says you and Jack and Dick have offered to go with her. What for? You are not going to tell me that you take her crazy notion of going to the Dauphin seriously, are you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">slowly</span>] There is something about her. They are pretty foulmouthed and foulminded down there in the guardroom, some of them. But there <span class="nonstandard">hasnt</span> been a word that has anything to do with her being a woman. They have stopped swearing before her. There is something. Something. It may be worth trying.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Oh, come, Polly! pull yourself together. Commonsense was never your strong point; but this is a little too much. [<span class="sd-in">He retreats disgustedly</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">unmoved</span>] What is the good of commonsense? If we had any commonsense we should join the Duke of Burgundy and the English king. They hold half the country, right down to the Loire. They have Paris. They have this castle: you know very well that we had to surrender it to the Duke of Bedford, and that you are only holding it on parole. The Dauphin is in Chinon, like a rat in a corner, except that he <span class="nonstandard">wont</span> fight. We <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> even know that he is the Dauphin: his mother says he <span class="nonstandard">isnt</span>; and she ought to know. Think of that! the queen denying the legitimacy of her own son!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, she married her daughter to the English king. Can you blame the woman?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I blame nobody. But thanks to her, the Dauphin is down and out; and we may as well face it. The English will take Orleans: the Bastard will not be able to stop them.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">He beat the English the year before last at Montargis. I was with him.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No matter: his men are cowed now; and he <span class="nonstandard">cant</span> work miracles. And I tell you that nothing can save our side now but a miracle.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Miracles are all right, Polly. The only difficulty about them is that they <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> happen nowadays.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I used to think so. I am not so sure now. [<span class="sd-in">Rising and moving ruminatively towards the window</span>] At all events this is not a time to leave any stone unturned. There is something about the girl.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Oh! You think the girl can work miracles, do you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I think the girl herself is a bit of a miracle. Anyhow, she is the last card left in our hand. Better play her than throw up the game. [<span class="sd-in">He wanders to the turret</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">wavering</span>] You really think that?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">turning</span>] Is there anything else left for us to think?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">going to him</span>] Look here, Polly. If you were in my place would you let a girl like that do you out of sixteen francs for a horse?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I will pay for the horse.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You will!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes: I will back my opinion.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You will really gamble on a forlorn hope to the tune of sixteen francs?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is not a gamble.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What else is it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is a certainty. Her words, and her ardent faith in God have put fire into me.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">giving him up</span>] Whew! You are as mad as she is.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">obstinately</span>] We want a few mad people now. See where the sane ones have landed us!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">his irresoluteness now openly swamping his affected decisiveness</span>] I shall feel like a precious fool. Still, if you feel sure⁠—?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I feel sure enough to take her to Chinon⁠—unless you stop me.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">This is not fair. You are putting the responsibility on me.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is on you whichever way you decide.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes: that’s just it. Which way am I to decide. You <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> see how awkward this is for me. [<span class="sd-in">Snatching at a dilatory step with an unconscious hope that Joan will make up his mind for him</span>] Do you think I ought to have another talk to her?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising</span>] Yes. [<span class="sd-in">He goes to the window and calls</span>] Joan!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN’S VOICE.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Will he let us go, Polly?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Come up. Come in. [<span class="sd-in">Turning to Robert</span>] Shall I leave you with her?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No: stay here; and back me up.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Poulengey sits down on the chest. Robert goes back to his magisterial chair, but remains standing to inflate himself more imposingly. Joan comes in, full of good news.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Jack will go halves for the horse.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well!! [<span class="sd-in">He sits, deflated</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">gravely</span>] Sit down, Joan.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">checked a little, and looking to Robert</span>] May I?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do what you are told.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Joan curtsies and sits down on the stool between them. Robert outfaces his perplexity with his most peremptory air.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What is your name?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">chattily</span>] They always call me Jenny in Lorraine. Here in France I am Joan. The soldiers call me The Maid.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What is your surname?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Surname? What is that? My father sometimes calls himself d’Arc; but I know nothing about it. You met my father. He⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes, yes; I remember. You come from Domremy in Lorraine, I think.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes; but what does it matter? we all speak French.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech"><span class="nonstandard">Dont</span> ask questions: answer them. How old are you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Seventeen: so they tell me. It might be nineteen. I <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> remember.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What did you mean when you said that St. Catherine and St. Margaret talked to you every day?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">They do.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What are they like?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">suddenly obstinate</span>] I will tell you nothing about that: they have not given me leave.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But you actually see them; and they talk to you just as I am talking to you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No: it is quite different. I cannot tell you: you must not talk to me about my voices.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">How do you mean? voices?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I hear voices telling me what to do. They come from God.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">They come from your imagination.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Of course. That is how the messages of God come to us.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Checkmate.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No fear! [<span class="sd-in">To Joan</span>] So God says you are to raise the siege of Orleans?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And to crown the Dauphin in Rheims Cathedral.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">gasping</span>] Crown the D⁠⸺! Gosh!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And to make the English leave France.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">sarcastic</span>] Anything else?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">charming</span>] Not just at present, thank you, squire.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I suppose you think raising a siege is as easy as chasing a cow out of a meadow. You think soldiering is anybody’s job?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I do not think it can be very difficult if God is on your side, and you are willing to put your life in His hand. But many soldiers are very simple.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">grimly</span>] Simple! Did you ever see English soldiers fighting?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">They are only men. God made them just like us; but He gave them their own country and their own language; and it is not His will that they should come into our country and try to speak our language.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Who has been putting such nonsense into your head? <span class="nonstandard">Dont</span> you know that soldiers are subject to their feudal lord, and that it is nothing to them or to you whether he is the duke of Burgundy or the king of England or the king of France? What has their language to do with it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I do not understand that a bit. We are all subject to the King of Heaven; and He gave us our countries and our languages, and meant us to keep them. If it were not so it would be murder to kill an Englishman in battle; and you, squire, would be in great danger of hell fire. You must not think about your duty to your feudal lord, but about your duty to God.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It’s no use, Robert: she can choke you like that every time.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Can she, by Saint Dennis! We shall see. [<span class="sd-in">To Joan</span>] We are not talking about God: we are talking about practical affairs. I ask you again, girl, have you ever seen English soldiers fighting? Have you ever seen them plundering, burning, <a id="tn-countryside"/>turning the countryside into a desert? Have you heard no tales of their Black Prince who was blacker than the devil himself, or of the English king’s father?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You must not be afraid, Robert⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Damn you, I am not afraid. And who gave you leave to call me Robert?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You were called so in church in the name of our Lord. All the other names are your father’s or your brother’s or anybody’s.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Tcha!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Listen to me, squire. At Domremy we had to fly to the next village to escape from the English soldiers. Three of them were left behind, wounded. I came to know these three poor goddams quite well. They had not half my strength.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do you know why they are called goddams?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No. Everyone calls them goddams.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is because they are always calling on their God to condemn their souls to perdition. That is what goddam means in their language. How do you like it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">God will be merciful to them; and they will act like His good children when they go back to the country He made for them, and made them for. I have heard the tales of the Black Prince. The moment he touched the soil of our country the devil entered into him and made him a black fiend. But at home, in the place made for him by God, he was good. It is always so. If I went into England against the will of God to conquer England, and tried to live there and speak its language, the devil would enter into me; and when I was old I should shudder to remember the wickedness I did.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Perhaps. But the more devil you were the better you might fight. That is why the goddams will take Orleans. And you cannot stop them, nor ten thousand like you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">One thousand like me can stop them. Ten like me can stop them with God on our side. [<span class="sd-in">She rises impetuously, and goes at him, unable to sit quiet any longer</span>]. You do not understand, squire. Our soldiers are always beaten because they are fighting only to save their skins; and the shortest way to save your skin is to run away. Our knights are thinking only of the money they will make in ransoms: it is not kill or be killed with them, but pay or be paid. But I will teach them all to fight that the will of God may be done in France; and then they will drive the poor goddams before them like sheep. You and Polly will live to see the day when there will not be an English soldier on the soil of France; and there will be but one king there: not the feudal English king, but God’s French one.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">to Poulengey</span>] This may be all rot, Polly; but the troops might swallow it, though nothing that we can say seems able to put any fight into them. Even the Dauphin might swallow it. And if she can put fight into him, she can put it into anybody.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I can see no harm in trying. Can you? And there is something about the girl⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">turning to Joan</span>] Now listen you to me; and [<span class="sd-in">desperately</span>] <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> cut in before I have time to think.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">plumping down on the stool again, like an obedient schoolgirl</span>] Yes, squire.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Your orders are, that you are to go to Chinon under the escort of this gentleman and three of his friends.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">radiant, clasping her hands</span>] Oh, squire! Your head is all circled with light, like a saint’s.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">How is she to get into the royal presence?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">who has looked up for his halo rather apprehensively</span>] I <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> know: how did she get into my presence? If the Dauphin can keep her out he is a better man than I take him for. [<span class="sd-in">Rising</span>] I will send her to Chinon; and she can say I sent her. Then let come what may: I can do no more.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And the dress? I may have a soldier’s dress, maynt I, squire?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Have what you please. I wash my hands of it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">wildly excited by her success</span>] Come, Polly. [<span class="sd-in">She dashes out</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">shaking Poulengey’s hand</span>] Goodbye, old man, I am taking a big chance. Few other men would have done it. But as you say, there is something about her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">POULENGEY.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes: there is something about her. Goodbye. [<span class="sd-in">He goes out</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Robert, still very doubtful whether he has not been made a fool of by a crazy female, and a social inferior to boot, scratches his head and slowly comes back from the door.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The steward runs in with a basket.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sir, sir⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What now?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">STEWARD.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The hens are laying like mad, sir. Five dozen eggs!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">ROBERT</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">stiffens convulsively; crosses himself; and forms with his pale lips the words</span>] Christ in heaven! [<span class="sd-in">Aloud but breathless</span>] She did come from God.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
