<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-UK">
	<head>
		<title>Scene VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:z3998:drama">
		<section id="scene-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_96">96</span>
				<h2 class="c017">SCENE VI</h2>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c018">Rouen, 30th May 1431. A great stone hall in the castle, arranged for a trial-at-law, but not a trial-by-jury, the court being the Bishop’s court with the Inquisition participating: hence there are two raised chairs side by side for the Bishop and the Inquisitor as judges. Rows of chairs radiating from them at an obtuse angle are for the canons, the doctors of law and theology, and the Dominican monks, who act as assessors. In the angle is a table for the scribes, with stools. There is also a heavy rough wooden stool for the prisoner. All these are at the inner end of the hall. The further end is open to the courtyard through a row of arches. The court is shielded from the weather by screens and curtains.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Looking down the great hall from the middle of the inner end, the judicial chairs and scribes’ table are to the right. The prisoner’s stool is to the left. There are arched doors right and left. It is a fine sunshiny May morning.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Warwick comes in through the arched doorway on the judges’ side, followed by his page.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE PAGE</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">pertly</span>] I suppose your lordship is aware that we have no business here. This is an ecclesiastical court; and we are only the secular arm.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_97">97</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am aware of that fact. Will it please your impudence to find the Bishop of Beauvais for me, and give him a hint that he can have a word with me here before the trial, if he wishes?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE PAGE</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">going</span>] Yes, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And mind you behave yourself. Do not address him as Pious Peter.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE PAGE.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No, my lord. I shall be kind to him, because, when The Maid is brought in, Pious Peter will have to pick a peck of pickled pepper.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Cauchon enters through the same door with a Dominican monk and a canon, the latter carrying a brief.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE PAGE.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The Right Reverend his lordship the Bishop of Beauvais. And two other reverend gentlemen.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Get out; and see that we are not interrupted.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE PAGE.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Right, my lord [<span class="sd-in">he vanishes airily</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I wish your lordship good-morrow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Good-morrow to your lordship. Have I had the pleasure of meeting your friends before? I think not.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">introducing the monk, who is on his right</span>] This, my lord, is Brother John Lemaître, <a id="tn-stdominic"/>of the order of St Dominic. He is acting as deputy for the Chief Inquisitor into the evil of heresy in France. Brother John: the Earl of Warwick.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Your Reverence is most welcome. We <span class="pageno" id="Page_98">98</span>have no Inquisitor in England, unfortunately; though we miss him greatly, especially on occasions like the present.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The Inquisitor smiles patiently, and bows. He is a mild elderly gentleman, but has evident reserves of authority and firmness.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">introducing the Canon, who is on his left</span>] This gentleman is Canon John D’Estivet, of the Chapter of Bayeux. He is acting as Promoter.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Promoter?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Prosecutor, you would call him in civil law.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Ah! prosecutor. Quite, quite. I am very glad to make your acquaintance, Canon D’Estivet.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">bows</span>] ! [<span class="sd-in">He is on the young side of middle age, well mannered, but vulpine beneath his veneer</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">May I ask what stage the proceedings have reached? It is now more than nine months since The Maid was captured at Compiègne by the Burgundians. It is fully four months since I bought her from the Burgundians for a very handsome sum, solely that she might be brought to justice. It is very nearly three months since I delivered her up to you, my Lord Bishop, as a person suspected of heresy. May I suggest that you are taking a rather unconscionable time to make up your minds about a very plain case? Is this trial never going to end?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_99">99</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">smiling</span>] It has not yet begun, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Not yet begun! Why, you have been at it eleven weeks!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">We have not been idle, my lord. We have held fifteen examinations of The Maid: six public and nine private.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">always patiently smiling</span>] You see, my lord, I have been present at only two of these examinations. They were proceedings of the Bishop’s court solely, and not of the Holy Office. I have only just decided to associate myself—that is, to associate the Holy Inquisition—with the Bishop’s court. I did not at first think that this was a case of heresy at all. I regarded it as a political case, and The Maid as a prisoner of war. But having now been present at two of the examinations, I must admit that this seems to be one of the gravest cases of heresy within my experience. Therefore everything is now in order; and we proceed to trial this morning. [<span class="sd-in">He moves towards the judicial chairs</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">This moment, if your lordship’s convenience allows.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">graciously</span>] Well, that is good news, gentlemen. I will not attempt to conceal from you that our patience was becoming strained.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">So I gathered from the threats of your soldiers to drown those of our people who favor The Maid.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_100">100</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Dear me! At all events their intentions were friendly to <strong>you</strong>, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">sternly</span>] I hope not. I am determined that the woman shall have a fair hearing. The justice of the Church is not a mockery, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">returning</span>] Never has there been a fairer examination within my experience, my lord. The Maid needs no lawyers to take her part: she will be tried by her most faithful friends, all ardently desirous to save her soul from perdition.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sir: I am the Promoter; and it has been my painful duty to present the case against the girl; but believe me, I would throw up my case today and hasten to her defence if I did not know that men far my superiors in learning and piety, in eloquence and persuasiveness, have been sent to reason with her, to explain to her the danger she is running, and the ease with which she may avoid it. [<span class="sd-in">Suddenly bursting into forensic eloquence, to the disgust of Cauchon and the Inquisitor, who have listened to him so far with patronizing approval</span>] Men have dared to say that we are acting from hate; but God is our witness that they lie. Have we tortured her? No. Have we ceased to exhort her; to implore her to have pity on herself; to come to the bosom of her Church as an erring but beloved child? Have we—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">interrupting drily</span>] Take care, Canon. All that you say is true; but if you make his lordship <span class="pageno" id="Page_101">101</span>believe it I will not answer for your life, and hardly for my own.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">deprecating, but by no means denying</span>] Oh, my lord, you are very hard on us poor English. But we certainly do not share your pious desire to save The Maid: in fact I tell you now plainly that her death is a political necessity which I regret but cannot help. If the Church lets her go—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">with fierce and menacing pride</span>] If the Church lets her go, woe to the man, were he the Emperor himself, who dares lay a finger on her! The Church is not subject to political necessity, my lord!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">interposing smoothly</span>] You need have no anxiety about the result, my lord. You have an invincible ally in the matter: one who is far more determined than you that she shall burn.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And who is this very convenient partisan, may I ask?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The Maid herself. Unless you put a gag in her mouth you cannot prevent her from convicting herself ten times over every time she opens it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That is perfectly true, my lord. My hair bristles on my head when I hear so young a creature utter such blasphemies.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, by all means do your best for her if you are quite sure it will be of no avail. [<span class="sd-in">Looking <span class="pageno" id="Page_102">102</span>hard at Cauchon</span>] I should be sorry to have to act without the blessing of the Church.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">with a mixture of cynical admiration and contempt</span>] And yet they say Englishmen are hypocrites! You play for your side, my lord, even at the peril of your soul. I cannot but admire such devotion; but I dare not go so far myself. I fear damnation.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If we feared anything we could never govern England, my lord. Shall I send your people in to you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes: it will be very good of your lordship to withdraw and allow the court to assemble.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Warwick turns on his heel, and goes out through the courtyard. Cauchon takes one of the judicial seats; and D’Estivet sits at the scribes’ table, studying his brief.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">casually, as he makes himself comfortable</span>] What scoundrels these English nobles are!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">taking the other judicial chair on Cauchon’s left</span>] All secular power makes men scoundrels. They are not trained for the work; and they have not the Apostolic Succession. Our own nobles are just as bad.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The Bishop’s assessors hurry into the hall, headed by Chaplain de Stogumber and Canon de Courcelles, a young priest of 30. The scribes sit at the table, leaving a chair vacant opposite D’Estivet. Some of the assessors take their seats: others stand chatting, <span class="pageno" id="Page_103">103</span>waiting for the proceedings to begin formally. De Stogumber, aggrieved and obstinate will not take his seat: neither will the Canon, who stands on his right.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Good morning, Master de Stogumber. [<span class="sd-in">To the Inquisitor</span>] Chaplain to the Cardinal of England.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">correcting him</span>] Of Winchester, my lord. I have to make a protest, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You make a great many.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am not without support, my lord. Here is Master de Courcelles, Canon of Paris, who associates himself with me in my protest.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, what is the matter?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">sulkily</span>] Speak you, Master de Courcelles, since I do not seem to enjoy his lordship’s confidence. [<span class="sd-in">He sits down in dudgeon next to Cauchon, on his right.</span>]</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">My lord: we have been at great pains to draw up an indictment of The Maid on <span class="nonstandard">sixtyfour</span> counts. We are now told that they have been reduced, without consulting us.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Master de Courcelles: I am the culprit. I am overwhelmed with admiration for the zeal displayed in your sixtyfour counts; but in accusing a heretic, as in other things, enough is enough. Also you must remember that all the members of the court are not so subtle and profound as you, and that some of your very great learning might appear <span class="pageno" id="Page_104">104</span>to them to be very great nonsense. Therefore I have thought it well to have your sixtyfour articles cut down to twelve—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">thunderstruck</span>] Twelve!!!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Twelve will, believe me, be quite enough for your purpose.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But some of the most important points have been reduced almost to nothing. For instance, The Maid has actually declared that the blessed saints Margaret and Catherine, and the holy Archangel Michael, spoke to her in French. That is a vital point.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You think, doubtless, that they should have spoken in Latin?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No: he thinks they should have spoken in English.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Naturally, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, as we are all here agreed, I think, that these voices of The Maid are the voices of evil spirits tempting her to her damnation, it would not be very courteous to you, Master de Stogumber, or to the King of England, to assume that English is the devil’s native language. So let it pass. The matter is not wholly omitted from the twelve articles. <a id="tn-gentlemen"/>Pray take your places, gentlemen; and let us proceed to business.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">All who have not taken their seats, do so.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, I protest. That is all.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I think it hard that all our work <span class="pageno" id="Page_105">105</span>should go for nothing. It is only another example of the diabolical influence which this woman exercises over the court. [<span class="sd-in">He takes his chair, which is on the Chaplain’s right</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do you suggest that I am under diabolical influence?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I suggest nothing, my lord. But it seems to me that there is a conspiracy here to hush up the fact that The Maid stole the Bishop of Senlis’s horse.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">keeping his temper with difficulty</span>] This is not a police court. Are we to waste our time on such rubbish?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising, shocked</span>] My lord: do you call the Bishop’s horse rubbish?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">blandly</span>] Master de Courcelles: The Maid alleges that she paid handsomely for the Bishop’s horse, and that if he did not get the money the fault was not hers. As that may be true, the point is one on which The Maid may well be acquitted.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes, if it were an ordinary horse. But the Bishop’s horse! how can she be acquitted for that? [<span class="sd-in">He sits down again, bewildered and discouraged</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I submit to you, with great respect, that if we persist in trying The Maid on trumpery issues on which we may have to declare her innocent, she may escape us on the great main issue <span class="pageno" id="Page_106">106</span>of heresy, on which she seems so far to insist on her own guilt. I will ask you, therefore, to say nothing, when The Maid is brought before us, of these stealings of horses, and dancings round fairy trees with the village children, and prayings at haunted wells, and a dozen other things which you were diligently inquiring into until my arrival. There is not a village girl in France against whom you could not prove such things: they all dance round haunted trees, and pray at magic wells. Some of them would steal the Pope’s horse if they got the chance. Heresy, gentlemen, heresy is the charge we have to try. The detection and suppression of heresy is my peculiar business: I am here as an inquisitor, not as an ordinary magistrate. Stick to the heresy, gentlemen; and leave the other matters alone.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I may say that we have sent to the girl’s village to make inquiries about her; and there is practically nothing serious against her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span class="speaker">
									<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
								</span>
							</td>
							<td rowspan="2">
								<span class="b2">}</span>
							</td>
							<td rowspan="2">
								<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising and clamoring together</span>]</span>
							</td>
							<td rowspan="2">
								<span class="b2">{</span>
							</td>
							<td>
								<span class="speech">Nothing serious, my lord—</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span class="speaker">
									<span class="fss">COURCELLES</span>
								</span>
							</td>
							<td>
								<span class="speech">What! The fairy tree not—</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">out of patience</span>] Be silent, gentlemen; or speak one at a time.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Courcelles collapses into his chair, intimidated.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">sulkily resuming his seat</span>] That is what The Maid said to us last Friday.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I wish you had followed her counsel, <span class="pageno" id="Page_107">107</span>sir. When I say nothing serious, I mean nothing that men of sufficiently large mind to conduct an inquiry like this would consider serious. I agree with my colleague the Inquisitor that it is on the count of heresy that we must proceed.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">a young but ascetically fine-drawn Dominican who is sitting next Courcelles, on his right</span>] But is there any great harm in the girl’s heresy? Is it not merely her simplicity? Many saints have said as much as Joan.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">dropping his blandness and speaking very gravely</span>] Brother Martin: if you had seen what I have seen of heresy, you would not think it a light thing even in its most apparently harmless and even lovable and pious origins. Heresy begins with people who are to all appearance better than their neighbors. A gentle and pious girl, or a young man who has obeyed the command of our Lord by giving all his riches to the poor, and putting on the garb of poverty, the life of austerity, and the rule of humility and charity, may be the founder of a heresy that will wreck both Church and Empire if not ruthlessly stamped out in time. The records of the holy Inquisition are full of histories we dare not give to the world, because they are beyond the belief of honest men and innocent women; yet they all began with saintly simpletons. I have seen this again and again. Mark what I say: the woman who quarrels with her clothes, and puts on the dress of a man, <span class="pageno" id="Page_108">108</span>is like the man who throws off his fur gown and dresses like John the Baptist: they are followed, as surely as the night follows the day, by bands of wild women and men who refuse to wear any clothes at all. When maids will neither marry nor take regular vows, and men reject marriage and exalt their lusts into divine inspirations, then, as surely as the summer follows the spring, they begin with polygamy, and end by incest. Heresy at first seems innocent and even laudable; but it ends in such a monstrous horror of unnatural wickedness that the most tenderhearted among you, if you saw it at work as I have seen it, would clamor against the mercy of the Church in dealing with it. For two hundred years the Holy Office has striven with these diabolical madnesses; and it knows that they begin always by vain and ignorant persons setting up their own judgment against the Church, and taking it upon themselves to be the interpreters of God’s will. You must not fall into the common error of mistaking these simpletons for liars and hypocrites. They believe honestly and sincerely that their diabolical inspiration is divine. Therefore you must be on your guard against your natural compassion. You are all, I hope, merciful men: how else could you have devoted your lives to the service of our gentle Savior? You are going to see before you a young girl, pious and chaste; for I must tell you, gentlemen, that the things said of her by our English friends are supported <span class="pageno" id="Page_109">109</span>by no evidence, whilst there is abundant testimony that her excesses have been excesses of religion and charity and not of worldliness and wantonness. This girl is not one of those whose hard features are the sign of hard hearts, and whose brazen looks and lewd demeanor condemn them before they are accused. The devilish pride that has led her into her present peril has left no mark on her countenance. Strange as it may seem to you, it has even left no mark on her character outside those special matters in which she is proud; so that you will see a diabolical pride and a natural humility seated side by side in the selfsame soul. Therefore be on your guard. God forbid that I should tell you to harden your hearts; for her punishment if we condemn her will be so cruel that we should forfeit our own hope of divine mercy were there one grain of malice against her in our hearts. But if you hate cruelty—and if any man here does not hate it I command him on his soul’s salvation to quit this holy court—I say, if you hate cruelty, remember that nothing is so cruel in its consequences as the toleration of heresy. Remember also that no court of law can be so cruel as the common people are to those whom they suspect of heresy. The heretic in the hands of the Holy Office is safe from violence, is assured of a fair trial, and cannot suffer death, even when guilty, if repentance follows sin. Innumerable lives of heretics have been saved because <span class="pageno" id="Page_110">110</span>the Holy Office has taken them out of the hands of the people, and because the people have yielded them up, knowing that the Holy Office would deal with them. Before the Holy Inquisition existed, and even now when its officers are not within reach, the unfortunate wretch suspected of heresy, perhaps quite ignorantly and unjustly, is stoned, torn in pieces, drowned, burned in his house with all his innocent children, without a trial, unshriven, unburied save as a dog is buried: all of them deeds hateful to God and most cruel to man. Gentlemen: I am compassionate by nature as well as by my profession; and though the work I have to do may seem cruel to those who do not know how much more cruel it would be to leave it undone, I would go to the stake myself sooner than do it if I did not know its righteousness, its necessity, its essential mercy. I ask you to address yourself to this trial in that conviction. Anger is a bad counsellor: cast out anger. Pity is sometimes a worse: cast out pity. But do not cast out mercy. Remember only that justice comes first. Have you anything to say, my lord, before we proceed to trial?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You have spoken for me, and spoken better than I could. I do not see how any sane man could disagree with a word that has fallen from you. But this I will add. The crude heresies of which you have told us are horrible; but their horror is like that of the black death: they rage for a while and <span class="pageno" id="Page_111">111</span>then die out, because sound and sensible men will not under any incitement be reconciled to nakedness and incest and polygamy and the like. <a id="tn-today"/>But we are confronted today throughout Europe with a heresy that is spreading among men not weak in mind nor diseased in brain: nay, the stronger the mind, the more obstinate the heretic. It is neither discredited by fantastic extremes nor corrupted by the common lusts of the flesh; but it, too, sets up the private judgment of the single erring mortal against the considered wisdom and experience of the Church. The mighty structure of Catholic Christendom will never be shaken by naked madmen or by the sins of Moab and Ammon. But it may be betrayed from within, and brought to barbarous ruin and desolation, by this arch heresy which the English Commander calls Protestantism.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE ASSESSORS</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">whispering</span>] Protestantism! What was that? What does the Bishop mean? Is it a new heresy? The English Commander, he said. Did you ever hear of Protestantism? etc., etc.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">continuing</span>] And that reminds me. What provision has the Earl of Warwick made for the defence of the secular arm should The Maid prove obdurate, and the people be moved to pity her?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Have no fear on that score, my lord. The noble earl has eight hundred men-at-arms at the gates. She will not slip through our <span class="pageno" id="Page_112">112</span>English fingers even if the whole city be on her side.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">revolted</span>] Will you not add, God grant that she repent and purge her sin?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That does not seem to me to be consistent; but of course I agree with your lordship.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">giving him up with a shrug of contempt</span>] The court sits.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Let the accused be brought in.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">calling</span>] The accused. Let her be brought in.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Joan, chained by the ankles, is brought in through the arched door behind the prisoner’s stool by a guard of English soldiers. With them is the Executioner and his assistants. They lead her to the prisoner’s stool, and place themselves behind it after taking off her chain. She wears a page’s black suit. Her long imprisonment and the strain of the examinations which have preceded the trial have left their mark on her; but her vitality still holds: she confronts the court unabashed, without a trace of the awe which their formal solemnity seems to require for the complete success of its impressiveness.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">kindly</span>] Sit down, Joan. [<span class="sd-in">She sits on the prisoner’s stool</span>]. You look very pale today. Are you not well?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Thank you kindly: I am well enough. But the Bishop sent me some carp; and it made me ill.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am sorry. I told them to see that it was fresh.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_113">113</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You meant to be good to me, I know; but it is a fish that does not agree with me. The English thought you were trying to poison me—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span class="speaker">
									<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
								</span>
							</td>
							<td rowspan="2">
								<span class="b2">}</span>
							</td>
							<td rowspan="2">
								<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">together</span>]</span>
							</td>
							<td rowspan="2">
								<span class="b2">{</span>
							</td>
							<td>
								<span class="speech">What!</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<span class="speaker">
									<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
								</span>
							</td>
							<td>
								<span class="speech">No, my lord.</span>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">continuing</span>] They are determined that I shall be burnt as a witch; and they sent their doctor to cure me; but he was forbidden to bleed me because the silly people believe that a witch’s witchery leaves her if she is bled; so he only called me filthy names. Why do you leave me in the hands of the English? I should be in the hands of the Church. And why must I be chained by the feet to a log of wood? Are you afraid I will fly away?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">harshly</span>] Woman: it is not for you to question the court: it is for us to question you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">When you were left unchained, did you not try to escape by jumping from a tower sixty feet high? If you cannot fly like a witch, how is it that you are still alive?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I suppose because the tower was not so high then. It has grown higher every day since you began asking me questions about it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Why did you jump from the tower?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">How do you know that I jumped?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You were found lying in the moat. Why did you leave the tower?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Why would anybody leave a prison if they could get out?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_114">114</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You tried to escape.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Of course I did; and not for the first time either. If you leave the door of the cage open the bird will fly out.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising</span>] That is a confession of heresy. I call the attention of the court to it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Heresy, he calls it! Am I a heretic because I try to escape from prison?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Assuredly, if you are in the hands of the Church, and you wilfully take yourself out of its hands, you are deserting the Church; and that is heresy.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is great nonsense. Nobody could be such a fool as to think that.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You hear, my lord, how I am reviled in the execution of my duty by this woman. [<span class="sd-in">He sits down indignantly</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I have warned you before, Joan, that you are doing yourself no good by these pert answers.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But you will not talk sense to me. I am reasonable if you will be reasonable.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">interposing</span>] This is not yet in order. You forget, Master Promoter, that the proceedings have not been formally opened. The time for questions is after she has sworn on the Gospels to tell us the whole truth.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You say this to me every time. I have said again and again that I will tell you all that concerns <span class="pageno" id="Page_115">115</span>this trial. But I cannot tell you the whole truth: God does not allow the whole truth to be told. You do not understand it when I tell it. It is an old saying that he who tells too much truth is sure to be hanged. I am weary of this argument: we have been over it nine times already. I have sworn as much as I will swear; and I will swear no more.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">My lord: she should be put to the torture.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You hear, Joan? That is what happens to the obdurate. Think before you answer. Has she been shewn the instruments?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE EXECUTIONER.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">They are ready, my lord. She has seen them.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If you tear me limb from limb until you separate my soul from my body you will get nothing out of me beyond what I have told you. What more is there to tell that you could understand? Besides, I cannot bear to be hurt; and if you hurt me I will say anything you like to stop the pain. But I will take it all back afterwards; so what is the use of it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">There is much in that. We should proceed mercifully.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But the torture is customary.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It must not be applied wantonly. If the accused will confess voluntarily, then its use cannot be justified.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But this is unusual and irregular. She refuses to take the oath.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_116">116</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">disgusted</span>] Do you want to torture the girl for the mere pleasure of it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">bewildered</span>] But it is not a pleasure. It is the law. It is customary. It is always done.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That is not so, Master, except when the inquiries are carried on by people who do not know their legal business.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But the woman is a heretic. I assure you it is always done.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">decisively</span>] It will not be done today if it is not necessary. Let there be an end of this. I will not have it said that we proceeded on forced confessions. We have sent our best preachers and doctors to this woman to exhort and implore her to save her soul and body from the fire: we shall not now send the executioner to thrust her into it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Your lordship is merciful, of course. But it is a great responsibility to depart from the usual practice.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Thou art a rare noodle, Master. Do what was done last time is thy rule, eh?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising</span>] Thou wanton: dost thou dare call me noodle?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Patience, Master, patience: I fear you will soon be only too terribly avenged.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">mutters</span>] Noodle indeed! [<span class="sd-in">He sits down, much discontented</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Meanwhile, let us not be moved by the rough side of a shepherd lass’s tongue.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_117">117</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Nay: I am no shepherd lass, though I have helped with the sheep like anyone else. I will do a lady’s work in the house—spin or weave—against any woman in Rouen.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">This is not a time for vanity, Joan. You stand in great peril.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I know it: have I not been punished for my vanity? If I had not worn my cloth of gold surcoat in battle like a fool, that Burgundian soldier would never have pulled me backwards off my horse; and I should not have been here.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If you are so clever at woman’s work why do you not stay at home and do it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">There are plenty of other women to do it; but there is nobody to do my work.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Come! we are wasting time on trifles. Joan: I am going to put a most solemn question to you. Take care how you answer; for your life and salvation are at stake on it. Will you for all you have said and done, be it good or bad, accept the judgment of God’s Church on earth? More especially as to the acts and words that are imputed to you in this trial by the Promoter here, will you submit your case to the inspired interpretation of the Church Militant?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am a faithful child of the Church. I will obey the Church—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">hopefully leaning forward</span>] You will?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_118">118</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">—provided it does not command anything impossible.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Cauchon sinks back in his chair with a heavy sigh. The Inquisitor purses his lips and frowns. Ladvenu shakes his head pitifully.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">She imputes to the Church the error and folly of commanding the impossible.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If you command me to declare that all that I have done and said, and all the visions and revelations I have had, were not from God, then that is impossible: I will not declare it for anything in the world. What God made me do I will never go back on; and what He has commanded or shall command I will not fail to do in spite of any man alive. That is what I mean by impossible. And in case the Church should bid me do anything contrary to the command I have from God, I will not consent to it, no matter what it may be.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE ASSESSORS</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">shocked and indignant</span>] Oh! The Church contrary to God! What do you say now? Flat heresy. This is beyond everything, etc., etc.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">throwing down his brief</span>] My lord: do you need anything more than this?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Woman: you have said enough to burn ten heretics. Will you not be warned? Will you not understand?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If the Church Militant tells you that your revelations and visions are sent by the <span class="pageno" id="Page_119">119</span>devil to tempt you to your damnation, will you not believe that the Church is wiser than you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I believe that God is wiser than I; and it is His commands that I will do. All the things that you call my crimes have come to me by the command of God. I say that I have done them by the order of God: it is impossible for me to say anything else. If any Churchman says the contrary I shall not mind him: I shall mind God alone, whose command I always follow.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">pleading with her urgently</span>] You do not know what you are saying, child. Do you want to kill yourself? Listen. Do you not believe that you are subject to the Church of God on earth?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes. When have I ever denied it?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Good. That means, does it not, that you are subject to our Lord the Pope, to the cardinals, the archbishops, and the bishops for whom his lordship stands here today?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">God must be served first.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Then your voices command you not to submit yourself to the Church Militant?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">My voices do not tell me to disobey the Church; but God must be served first.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And you, and not the Church, are to be the judge?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What other judgment can I judge by but my own?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_120">120</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE ASSESSORS</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">scandalized</span>] Oh! [<span class="sd-in">They cannot find words</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Out of your own mouth you have condemned yourself. We have striven for your salvation to the verge of sinning ourselves: we have opened the door to you again and again; and you have shut it in our faces and in the face of God. Dare you pretend, after what you have said, that you are in a state of grace?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If I am not, may God bring me to it: if I am, may God keep me in it!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That is a very good reply, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Were you in a state of grace when you stole the Bishop’s horse?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising in a fury</span>] Oh, devil take the Bishop’s horse and you too! We are here to try a case of heresy; and no sooner do we come to the root of the matter than we are thrown back by idiots who understand nothing but horses. [<span class="sd-in">Trembling with rage, he forces himself to sit down</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Gentlemen, gentlemen: in clinging to these small issues you are The Maid’s best advocates. I am not surprised that his lordship has lost patience with you. What does the Promoter say? Does he press these trumpery matters?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am bound by my office to press everything; but when the woman confesses a heresy that must bring upon her the doom of excommunication, of what consequence is it that she has been <span class="pageno" id="Page_121">121</span>guilty also of offences which expose her to minor penances? I share the impatience of his lordship as to these minor charges. Only, with great respect, I must emphasize the gravity of two very horrible and blasphemous crimes which she does not deny. First, she has intercourse with evil spirits, and is therefore a sorceress. Second, she wears men’s clothes, which is indecent, unnatural, and abominable; and in spite of our most earnest remonstrances and entreaties, she will not change them even to receive the sacrament.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Is the blessed St Catherine an evil spirit? Is St Margaret? Is Michael the Archangel?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">How do you know that the spirit which appears to you is an archangel? Does he not appear to you as a naked man?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do you think God cannot afford clothes for him?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The assessors cannot help smiling, especially as the joke is against Courcelles.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well answered, Joan.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is, in effect, well answered. But no evil spirit would be so simple as to appear to a young girl in a guise that would scandalize her when he meant her to take him for a messenger from the Most High? Joan: the Church instructs you that these apparitions are demons seeking your soul’s perdition. Do you accept the instruction of the Church?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_122">122</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I accept the messenger of God. How could any faithful believer in the Church refuse him?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Wretched woman: again I ask you, do you know what you are saying?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You wrestle in vain with the devil for her soul, my lord: she will not be saved. Now as to this matter of the man’s dress. For the last time, will you put off that impudent attire, and dress as becomes your sex?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I will not.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">pouncing</span>] The sin of disobedience, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">distressed</span>] But my voices tell me I must dress as a soldier.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Joan, Joan: does not that prove to you that the voices are the voices of evil spirits? Can you suggest to us one good reason why an angel of God should give you such shameless advice?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Why, yes: what can be plainer commonsense? I was a soldier living among soldiers. I am a prisoner guarded by soldiers. If I were to dress as a woman they would think of me as a woman; and then what would become of me? If I dress as a soldier they think of me as a soldier, and I can live with them as I do at home with my brothers. That is why St Catherine tells me I must not dress as a woman until she gives me leave.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">COURCELLES.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">When will she give you leave?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">When you take me out of the hands of the <span class="pageno" id="Page_123">123</span>English soldiers. I have told you that I should be in the hands of the Church, and not left night and day with four soldiers of the Earl of Warwick. Do you want me to live with them in petticoats?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">My lord: what she says is, God knows, very wrong and shocking; but there is a grain of worldly sense in it such as might impose on a simple village maiden.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">If we were as simple in the village as you are in your courts and palaces, there would soon be no wheat to make bread for you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">That is the thanks you get for trying to save her, Brother Martin.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Joan: we are all trying to save you. His lordship is trying to save you. The Inquisitor could not be more just to you if you were his own daughter. But you are blinded by a terrible pride and self-sufficiency.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Why do you say that? I have said nothing wrong. I cannot understand.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The blessed St Athanasius has laid it down in his creed that those who cannot understand are damned. It is not enough to be simple. It is not enough even to be what simple people call good. The simplicity of a darkened mind is no better than the simplicity of a beast.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">There is great wisdom in the simplicity of a beast, let me tell you; and sometimes great foolishness in the wisdom of scholars.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_124">124</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">We know that, Joan: we are not so foolish as you think us. Try to resist the temptation to make pert replies to us. Do you see that man who stands behind you [<span class="sd-in">he indicates the Executioner</span>] ?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">turning and looking at the man</span>] Your torturer? But the Bishop said I was not to be tortured.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You are not to be tortured because you have confessed everything that is necessary to your condemnation. That man is not only the torturer: he is also the Executioner. Executioner: let The Maid hear your answers to my questions. Are you prepared for the burning of a heretic this day?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE EXECUTIONER.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes, Master.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Is the stake ready?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE EXECUTIONER.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is. In the market-place. The English have built it too high for me to get near her and make the death easier. It will be a cruel death.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">horrified</span>] But you are not going to burn me now?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You realize it at last.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">There are eight hundred English soldiers waiting to take you to the market-place the moment the sentence of excommunication has passed the lips of your judges. You are within a few short moments of that doom.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_125">125</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">looking round desperately for rescue</span>] Oh God!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do not despair, Joan. The Church is merciful. You can save yourself.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">hopefully</span>] Yes: my voices promised me I should not be burnt. St Catherine bade me be bold.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Woman: are you quite mad? Do you not yet see that your voices have deceived you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Oh no: that is impossible.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Impossible! They have led you straight to your excommunication, and to the stake which is there waiting for you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">pressing the point hard</span>] Have they kept a single promise to you since you were taken at Compiègne? The devil has betrayed you. The Church holds out its arms to you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">despairing</span>] Oh, it is true: it is true: my voices have deceived me. I have been mocked by devils: my faith is broken. I have dared and dared; but only a fool will walk into a fire: God, who gave me my commonsense, cannot will me to do that.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Now God be praised that He has saved you at the eleventh hour! [<span class="sd-in">He hurries to the vacant seat at the scribes’ table, and snatches a sheet of paper, on which he sets to work writing eagerly</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Amen!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What must I do?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You must sign a solemn recantation of your heresy.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_126">126</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sign? That means to write my name. I cannot write.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You have signed many letters before.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes; but someone held my hand and guided the pen. I can make my mark.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">who has been listening with growing alarm and indignation</span>] My lord: do you mean that you are going to allow this woman to escape us?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The law must take its course, Master de Stogumber. And you know the law.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising, purple with fury</span>] I know that there is no faith in a Frenchman. [<span class="sd-in">Tumult, which he shouts down</span>]. I know what my lord the Cardinal of Winchester will say when he hears of this. I know what the Earl of Warwick will do when he learns that you intend to betray him. There are eight hundred men at the gate who will see that this abominable witch is burnt in spite of your teeth.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE ASSESSORS</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">meanwhile</span>] What is this? What did he say? He accuses us of treachery! This is past bearing. No faith in a Frenchman! Did you hear that? This is an intolerable fellow. Who is he? Is this what English Churchmen are like? He must be mad or drunk, etc., etc.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising</span>] Silence, pray! Gentlemen: pray silence! Master Chaplain: bethink you a moment of your holy office: of what you are, and where you are. I direct you to sit down.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_127">127</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">folding his arms doggedly, his face working convulsively</span>] I will NOT sit down.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Master Inquisitor; this man has called me a traitor to my face before now.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">So you are a traitor. You are all traitors. You have been doing nothing but begging this damnable witch on your knees to recant all through this trial.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">placidly resuming his seat</span>] If you will not sit, you must stand: that is all.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I will NOT stand [<span class="sd-in">he flings himself back into his chair</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising with the paper in his hand</span>] My lord: here is the form of recantation for The Maid to sign.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Read it to her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do not trouble. I will sign it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Woman: you must know what you are putting your hand to. Read it to her, Brother Martin. And let all be silent.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">reading quietly</span>] “I, Joan, commonly called The Maid, a miserable sinner, do confess that I have most grievously sinned in the following articles. I have pretended to have revelations from God and the angels and the blessed saints, and perversely rejected the Church’s warnings that these were temptations by demons. I have blasphemed abominably by wearing an immodest dress, contrary to the Holy Scripture and the canons of the Church. <span class="pageno" id="Page_128">128</span>Also I have clipped my hair in the style of a man, and, against all the duties which have made my sex specially acceptable in heaven, have taken up the sword, even to the shedding of human blood, inciting men to slay each other, invoking evil spirits to delude them, and stubbornly and most blasphemously imputing these sins to Almighty God. I confess to the sin of sedition, to the sin of idolatry, to the sin of disobedience, to the sin of pride, and to the sin of heresy. All of which sins I now renounce and abjure and depart from, <a id="tn-humbly"/>humbly thanking you Doctors and Masters who have brought me back to the truth and into the grace of our Lord. And I will never return to my errors, but will remain in communion with our Holy Church and in obedience to our Holy Father the Pope of Rome. All this I swear by God Almighty and the Holy Gospels, in witness whereto I sign my name to this recantation.”</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You understand this, Joan?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">listless</span>] It is plain enough, sir.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And it is true?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It may be true. If it were not true, the fire would not be ready for me in the market-place.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">taking up his pen and a book, and going to her quickly lest she should compromise herself again</span>] Come, child: let me guide your hand. Take the pen. [<span class="sd-in">She does so; and they begin to write, using the book as a desk</span>] J.E.H.A.N.E. So. Now make your mark by yourself.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_129">129</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">makes her mark, and gives him back the pen, tormented by the rebellion of her soul against her mind and body</span>] There!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">replacing the pen on the table, and handing the recantation to Cauchon with a reverence</span>] Praise be to God, my brothers, the lamb has returned to the flock; and the shepherd rejoices in her more than in ninety and nine just persons. [<span class="sd-in">He returns to his seat</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">taking the paper from Cauchon</span>] We declare thee by this act set free from the danger of excommunication in which thou stoodest. [<span class="sd-in">He throws the paper down to the table</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I thank you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">But because thou hast sinned most presumptuously against God and the Holy Church, and that thou mayest repent thy errors in solitary contemplation, and be shielded from all temptation to return to them, we, for the good of thy soul, and for a penance that may wipe out thy sins and bring thee finally unspotted to the throne of grace, do condemn thee to eat the bread of sorrow and drink the water of affliction to the end of thy earthly days in perpetual imprisonment.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising in consternation and terrible anger</span>] Perpetual imprisonment? Am I not then to be set free?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">mildly shocked</span>] Set free, child, after <span class="pageno" id="Page_130">130</span>such wickedness as yours! What are you dreaming of?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Give me that writing. [<span class="sd-in">She rushes to the table; snatches up the paper; and tears it into fragments</span>] Light your fire: do you think I dread it as much as the life of a rat in a hole? My voices were right.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Joan! Joan!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Yes: they told me you were fools [<span class="sd-in">the word gives great offence</span>], and that I was not to listen to your fine words nor trust to your charity. You promised me my life; but you lied [<span class="sd-in">indignant exclamations</span>]. You think that life is nothing but not being stone dead. It is not the bread and water I fear: I can live on bread: when have I asked for more? It is no hardship to drink water if the water be clean. Bread has no sorrow for me, and water no affliction. But to shut me from the light of the sky and the sight of the fields and flowers; to chain my feet so that I can never again ride with the soldiers nor climb the hills; to make me breathe foul damp darkness, and keep from me everything that brings me back to the love of God when your wickedness and foolishness tempt me to hate Him: all this is worse than the furnace in the Bible that was heated seven times. I could do without my warhorse; I could drag about in a skirt; I could let the banners and the trumpets and the knights and soldiers pass me and leave me behind as they leave the other <span class="pageno" id="Page_131">131</span>women, if only I could still hear the wind in the trees, the larks in the sunshine, the young lambs crying through the healthy frost, and the blessed blessed church bells that send my angel voices floating to me on the wind. But without these things I cannot live; and by your wanting to take them <strong>away</strong> from me, or from any human creature, I know that your counsel is of the devil, and that mine is of God.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE ASSESSORS</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">in great commotion</span>] Blasphemy! blasphemy! She is possessed. She said our counsel was of the devil. And hers of God. Monstrous! The devil is in our midst, etc., etc.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">D’ESTIVET</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">shouting above the din</span>] She is a relapsed heretic, obstinate, incorrigible, and altogether unworthy of the mercy we have shewn her. I call for her excommunication.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">to the Executioner</span>] Light your fire, man. To the stake with her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The Executioner and his assistants hurry out through the courtyard.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You wicked girl: if your counsel were of God would He not deliver you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">JOAN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">His ways are not your ways. He wills that I go through the fire to His bosom; for I am His child, and you are not fit that I should live among you. That is my last word to you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The soldiers seize her.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising</span>] Not yet.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">They wait. There is a dead silence. Cauchon <span class="pageno" id="Page_132">132</span>turns to the Inquisitor with an inquiring look. The Inquisitor nods affirmatively. They rise solemnly, and intone the sentence antiphonally.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">We decree that thou art a relapsed heretic.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Cast out from the unity of the Church.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Sundered from her body.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Infected with the leprosy of heresy.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">A member of Satan.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">We declare that thou must be excommunicate.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And now we do cast thee out, segregate thee, and abandon thee to the secular power.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Admonishing the same secular power that it moderate its judgment of thee in respect of death and division of the limbs. [<span class="sd-in">He resumes his seat</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">And if any true sign of penitence appear in thee, to permit our Brother Martin to administer to thee the sacrament of penance.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Into the fire with the witch [<span class="sd-in">he rushes at her, and helps the soldiers to push her out</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Joan is taken away through the courtyard. The assessors rise in disorder, and follow the soldiers, except Ladvenu, who has hidden his face in his hands.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising again in the act of sitting down</span>] <span class="pageno" id="Page_133">133</span>No, no; this is irregular. The representative of the secular arm should be here to receive her from us.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">also on his feet again</span>] That man is an incorrigible fool.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Brother Martin: see that everything is done in order.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">My<a id="tn-side"/> place is at her side, my lord. You must exercise your own authority. [<span class="sd-in">He hurries out</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">These English are impossible: they will thrust her straight into the fire. Look!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">He points to the courtyard, in which the glow and flicker of fire can now be seen reddening the May daylight. Only the Bishop and the Inquisitor are left in the Court.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">turning to go</span>] We must stop that.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">calmly</span>] Yes; but not too fast, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">halting</span>] But there is not a moment to lose.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">We have proceeded in perfect order. If the English choose to put themselves in the wrong, it is not our business to put them in the right. A flaw in the procedure may be useful later on: one never knows. And the sooner it is over, the better for that poor girl.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">relaxing</span>] That is true. But I suppose we must see this dreadful thing through.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">One gets used to it. Habit is everything. I am accustomed to the fire: it is soon <span class="pageno" id="Page_134">134</span>over. But it is a terrible thing to see a young and innocent creature crushed between these mighty forces, the Church and the Law.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">You call her innocent!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Oh, quite innocent. What does she know of the Church and the Law? She did not understand a word we were saying. It is the ignorant who suffer. Come, or we shall be late for the end.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">going with him</span>] I shall not be sorry if we are: I am not so accustomed as you.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">They are going out when Warwick comes in, meeting them.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Oh, I am intruding. I thought it was all over. [<span class="sd-in">He makes a feint of retiring</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Do not go, my lord. It is all over.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE INQUISITOR.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The execution is not in our hands, my lord; but it is desirable that we should witness the end. So by your leave—[<span class="sd-in">He bows, and goes out through the courtyard</span>].</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">There is some doubt whether your people have observed the forms of law, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am told that there is some doubt whether your authority runs in this city, my lord. It is not in your diocese. However, if you will answer for that I will answer for the rest.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">CAUCHON.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It is to God that we both must answer. Good morning, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">My lord: good morning.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">They look at one another for a moment with unconcealed <span class="pageno" id="Page_135">135</span>hostility. Then Cauchon follows the Inquisitor out. Warwick looks round. Finding himself alone, he calls for attendance.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Hallo: some attendance here! [<span class="sd-in">Silence</span>]. Hallo, there! [<span class="sd-in">Silence</span>]. Hallo! Brian, you young blackguard, where are you? [<span class="sd-in">Silence</span>]. Guard! [<span class="sd-in">Silence</span>]. They have all gone to see the burning: even that child.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The silence is broken by someone frantically howling and sobbing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What in the devil’s name—?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">The Chaplain staggers in from the courtyard like a demented creature, his face streaming with tears, making the piteous sounds that Warwick has heard. He stumbles to the prisoner’s stool, and throws himself upon it with heartrending sobs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">going to him and patting him on the shoulder</span>] What is it, Master John? What is the matter?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">clutching at his hands</span>] My lord, my lord: for Christ’s sake pray for my wretched guilty soul.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">soothing him</span>] Yes, yes: of course I will. Calmly, gently—</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">blubbering miserably</span>] I am not a bad man, my lord.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">No, no: not at all.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I meant no harm. I did not know what it would be like.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div>
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_136">136</span>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">hardening</span>] Oh! You saw it, then?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I did not know what I was doing. I am a hotheaded fool; and I shall be damned to all eternity for it.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Nonsense! Very distressing, no doubt; but it was not your doing.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">lamentably</span>] I let them do it. If I had known, I would have torn her from their hands. You don’t know: you <span class="nonstandard">havnt</span> seen: it is so easy to talk when you <span class="nonstandard">dont</span> know. You madden yourself with words: you damn yourself because it feels grand to throw oil on the flaming hell of your own temper. But when it is brought home to you; when you see the thing you have done; when it is blinding your eyes, stifling your nostrils, tearing your heart, then—then—[<span class="sd-in">Falling on his knees</span>] O God, take away this sight from me! O Christ, deliver me from this fire that is consuming me! She cried to Thee in the midst of it: Jesus! Jesus! Jesus! She is in Thy bosom; and I am in hell for evermore.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">summarily hauling him to his feet</span>] Come come, man! you must pull yourself together. We shall have the whole town talking of this. [<span class="sd-in">He throws him not too gently into a chair at the table</span>] If you have not the nerve to see these things, why do you not do as I do, and stay away?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">bewildered and submissive</span>] She asked for a cross. A soldier gave her two sticks tied together. Thank God he was an Englishman! I <span class="pageno" id="Page_137">137</span>might have done it; but I did not: I am a coward, a mad dog, a fool. But he was an Englishman too.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">The fool! They will burn him too if the priests get hold of him.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">shaken with convulsion</span>] Some of the people laughed at her. They would have laughed at Christ. They were French people, my lord: I know they were French.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Hush: someone is coming. Control yourself.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Ladvenu comes back through the courtyard to Warwick’s right hand, carrying a bishop’s cross which he has taken from a church. He is very grave and composed.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am informed that it is all over, Brother Martin.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">enigmatically</span>] We do not know, my lord. It may have only just begun.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">What does that mean, exactly?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I took this cross from the church for her that she might see it to the last: she had only two sticks that she put into her bosom. When the fire crept round us, and she saw that if I held the cross before her I should be burnt myself, she warned me to get down and save myself. My lord: a girl who could think of another’s danger in such a moment was not inspired by the devil. When I had to snatch the cross from her sight, she looked up to heaven. And I do not believe that the heavens were empty. <span class="pageno" id="Page_138">138</span>I firmly believe that her Savior appeared to her then in His tenderest glory. She called to Him and died. This is not the end for her, but the beginning.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I am afraid it will have a bad effect on the people.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">LADVENU.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">It had, my lord, on some of them. I heard laughter. Forgive me for saying that I hope and believe it was English laughter.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE CHAPLAIN</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">rising frantically</span>] No: it was not. There was only one Englishman there that disgraced his country; and that was the mad dog de Stogumber. [<span class="sd-in">He rushes wildly out, shrieking</span>] Let them torture him. Let them burn him. I will go pray among her ashes. I am no better than Judas: I will hang myself.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Quick, Brother Martin: follow him: he will do himself some mischief. After him, quick.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="sd-out">
				<p class="c011">Ladvenu hurries out, Warwick urging him. The Executioner comes in by the door behind the judges’ chairs; and Warwick, returning, finds himself face to face with him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Well, fellow: who are you?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE EXECUTIONER</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">with dignity</span>] I am not addressed as fellow, my lord. I am the Master Executioner of Rouen: it is a highly skilled mystery. I am come to tell your lordship that your orders have been obeyed.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">I crave your pardon, Master Executioner; and I will see that you lose nothing by having <span class="pageno" id="Page_139">139</span>no relics to sell. I have your word, have I, that nothing remains, not a bone, not a nail, not a hair?</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">THE EXECUTIONER.</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">Her heart would not burn, my lord; but everything that was left is at the bottom of the river. You have heard the last of her.</span>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="line">
				<p>
					<span class="speaker">
						<span class="fss">WARWICK</span>
					</span>
					<span class="speech">[<span class="sd-in">with a wry smile, thinking of what Ladvenu said</span>] The last of her? Hm! I wonder!</span>
				</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
